## Statement on Academic Freedom

## Final Report of the Academic Council Task Force

## November 2011 (updated on 21 April 2022)

## Background

In  February 2011 the President of UCD requested the Academic Council to develop  a  policy  statement  on  Academic  Freedom.  While  the  principle  of academic freedom has been enshrined in the Universities Act (1997) 1 , and was endorsed in 2011 by both the Governing Authority and the Academic Council of the University, a formal policy providing the context for its understanding and recommending principles and guidelines for its operation has hitherto not been defined. Such a policy statement would highlight the fundamental importance of the principles underpinning the proper functioning of the University, as well as  the  benefits  to  society,  together  with  the  privileges and  commensurate responsibilities of all stakeholders that are associated with  academic freedom. A clear policy, approved by the Academic Council, would assist in informing decision-making,  while  the  clarity  afforded  by  a formal  policy  would  help improve the overall operation of the University.

The Task Force that developed the policy document was representative of all five colleges in the University. It was chaired by Professor Pat Shannon (School of Geological Sciences), with the five college representatives being Professor Kathleen James-Chakraborty (College of Arts &amp; Celtic Studies), Professor Bill Roche  (College  of  Business  &amp;  Law),  Dr  Mícheál  Ó  Searcóid  (College  of Engineering,  Mathematical  &amp;  Physical  Sciences),  Professor  Dermot  Moran (College  of  Human  Sciences)  and  Professor  Tom  Bolger  (College  of  Life Sciences). This report, submitted to the Academic Council, is the product of the deliberations of the  committee,  based  upon  analysis  of the legislative framework,  current  understanding  across  a  broad  range  of  disciplines  and traditions, the ethos of the University, and best international policy and practice in the area of academic freedom.

## Introduction

Among the major purposes of a university, as outlined in the Universities Act (1997),  are  the  advancement  of  knowledge  through  teaching,  scholarly research and scientific investigation, to promote learning in its student body and in society generally, and to foster a capacity for independent critical thinking. Academic freedom is at the very core of the mission of a university to achieve these goals and a fully developed higher education system cannot exist without it. It has historically and globally been a defining characteristic of universities, necessary for the freedom of thinking and expression in teaching,  learning and research.  Article  13  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European Union (2000) 2  recognised such freedom in stating that

1 Universities Act (1997). https://www.irishstatutebook.ie/eli/1997/act/24/enacted/en/html

2 Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union  (2000).  Official  Journal  of  the  European Communities. C364. 22pp. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/default\_en.htm

'The  arts  and  scientific  research  shall  be  free  of  constraint.  Academic freedom shall be respected' .

Within Ireland, academic freedom was acknowledged in the Universities Act (1997) which stated that a university, in performing its function shall:

'… have the right and responsibility to preserve the traditional principles of academic freedom in the conduct of its internal affairs' .

The  obligations  of  a  university  to  safeguard  this  right  are  clear  with  the statement in the Act that

'…if,  in  the  interpretation  of  this  Act,  there  is  a  doubt  regarding  the meaning of any provision, a construction that would promote that ethos and those traditions and principles shall be preferred to a construction that would not so promote' .

At the level of the individual, the Act is specific in stating that 'A member of the academic staff of a university shall have the freedom, within the law, in his or her teaching, research and any other activities either in or outside the university, to question and test received wisdom, to put forward new ideas and to state controversial or unpopular opinions and shall not be disadvantaged, or subject to less favourable treatment by the university, for the exercise of that freedom' .

This freedom, within the law, to put forward new ideas and controversial or unpopular  opinions  was  enshrined  in  the  Governing  Statute  (Chapter  1)  of University College  Dublin 3 .  This  Statute  (Chapter  6)  also  decrees  that  the control  of  the  academic  affairs  of  the  University  is  subject  to  the  traditional principles of academic freedom.

These underlying principles of academic freedom are also echoed  in the policy statements of many outstanding universities and groups of universities. The 1998 Policy Statement of the International Association of Universities (of which UCD is a member) on Academic Freedom, University Autonomy and Social Responsibility 4 recalls  the  three  indissociable  principles  for  which  every university should stand, namely: the right to pursue knowledge for  its own sake and to follow wherever the search for truth may lead; the tolerance of divergent opinion  and  freedom  from  political  interference;  the  obligation  as  social institutions  to  promote,  through  teaching  and  research,  the  principles  of freedom and justice, of human dignity and solidarity, and to develop mutually material  and  moral  aid  on  an  international  level.  It  defines  the  principles  of academic freedom as the freedom for members of the academic community scholars,  teachers  and  students  -  to  follow  their  scholarly  activities  within  a framework  determined  by  that  community  in  respect  of  ethical  rules  and international standards, and without outside pressure.

3 Statutes  of  University  College  Dublin,  The  National  University  of  Ireland,  Dublin. https://hub.ucd.ie/usis/!W\_HU\_MENU.P\_PUBLISH?p\_tag=GD-DOCLAND&amp;ID=277

4 1998  Policy  Statement  of  the  International  Association  of  Universities. Academic Freedom, University Autonomy and Social Responsibility . www.unesco.org/iau/he/af/index.html

The rights of academic freedom confer responsibilities on the University and upon  each  member  of  the  academic  profession,  notably  the  obligation  to strive  for  excellence,  challenge  received  opinion,  advance  the  frontiers  of knowledge through research, and disseminate  results  through  teaching  and publication.  These  are  articulated  in  documentations  such  as  the  IAU  1998 Policy Statement. Under UCD's Governing Statute (Chapter 19) the responsibilities and broad duties of academics are outlined as follows:

'Faculty shall carry out their duties with due regard to the Statutes and Regulations of the University and the policies and procedures determined by the Governing Authority and shall engage in research and scholarship, shall  instruct  students  of  the  University  and  shall  perform  such  other appropriate duties as the President, Head of College, Head of School or Research Institute Director or such other senior member of staff to whom the  President  has  delegated  the  appropriate  authority  may  reasonably assign to them. Faculty shall serve on such committees and perform such administrative functions as may be required.'

Academic  freedom  cannot  be  an  excuse  for  not  carrying  out  the  teaching, research and such administration  duties as may reasonably be required for the efficient  functioning  of  the  University.  Neither  can  it  be  used  as  a  cloak  for underperformance in these duties.

## Benefits to Society

Although the benefits of a free press and open discussion of ideas are broadly recognised as being at the very heart of a modern democracy, the concept of academic freedom is equally central, although perhaps this is not as widely appreciated by the public. The general understanding is that it embodies the freedom, and indeed the responsibility, to question and test wisdom, and to put  forward  new  opinions  (including  dissenting,  controversial  or  unpopular views) based upon informed experience, research and consideration, without the fear of losing jobs, privileges or career prospects at educational institutions. Moreover, creative academic work, essential in order to advance knowledge, overcome prejudice, inform and benefit society in the present and for the future, takes time and experience to develop and hone; there is the presupposition that the academic has the appropriate time to complete the task.

Society, the major sponsor of universities is also the major benefactor of the products of academic freedom. Its students are educated and taught to learn. Its  industries  receive  the  benefits of  research.  Its  future  depends on  current basic  research  that  provides  both  the  structures  from  which  new  ideas  will emerge and flourish, and the foundation on which undreamed-of technological advances  will  be  conceived  and  realised.  New  technologies  and  spin-off industries arise from ideas developed under the freedom to innovate. These yield medical, pharmaceutical, technological, engineering, and  numerous other products.  Cultural  aspects  of  society  are  enriched  by  the  books,  plays  and multiple forms of artistic and literary expression and endeavours nurtured by universities. Powerful social, educational and political ideas are discovered that contribute  to  driving  social  change  and  to  the  development  of  public  policy. The  outputs  of  research,  through  publication  and  dissemination,  increase knowledge and enhance the reputation of the individuals, the institution  and ultimately  the  society  that sponsors  and  provides  the environment and the

freedom to complete the work of knowledge generation and dissemination.

However, the purpose of a university is sometimes mistakenly seen as narrowly utilitarian,  and  thus  as  largely  limited  to  providing  technological  skills  and  to stimulating industrial and cultural developments. Developing society's skills in imaginative  vision  and  critical  thinking  is  one  of  the  greatest  benefits  that  a university can provide, and this is clearly linked to the protection afforded by academic  freedom.  Such  critical  thinking  contributes  to  the  shaping  of government policy, and to informing public opinion on the development of a civilised society.

Academic freedom conveys an obligation on academic staff to inform society through  independent  research,  analysis  and  discourse.  The  lack  of  such independent analysis and the fear of sanctions for questioning decisions were referred to in the Nyberg Report (2011) 5  on the banking crisis, which affirmed that '.. the reported lack of challenging discourse and analysis …, together with occasional  mention  of  alleged  or  feared  sanctions  against  contrarians…  ' contributed to the problem. The receipt of well-grounded, independent advice, unshackled  by  fear  or favour, on  many  areas  critical to the survival, development and optimal functioning of society, is probably more important to Ireland now than at any time since the foundation of the State.

## The University and the State

Universities in Ireland, as in most other European countries, are heavily reliant on state funding. Both academic staff and students should be aware of their dependence on the state, and increasingly on industry and other benefactors, to support them in their work. The receipt of such funding carries with it the duty of accountability for how it is deployed and for the results it achieves. However, such accountability does not encompass a right to control or dictate the manner in which the university conducts its core business of teaching and research nor should  it  curtail  academic  freedom.  Only  by  autonomy  to  govern  their  own affairs can universities and academics protect an environment in which they are free to exercise their rights of freedom of speech and thought, and ultimately provide an independent voice on matters in which they are expert. For example, the  standards  of  degrees  can  only  be  defended  if  recognised  as  purely academic matters  in  which  the  State  does  not  enter.  As  argued  by  Russell (1993) 6 , if this principle is not accepted, universities should cease to exist as they will serve no purpose other than to 'rubber stamp' uninformed decisions reached  by  the  State.  This  university/state  symbiosis,  in  which  each  is dependent  on  and  benefits  from  the  other,  will  always  involve  a  degree  of tension regarding the value of the contribution of each party and the  degree to which that contribution engenders obligations and entitles control.

5 Nyberg, P. (2011). Misjudging Risk: Causes of the Systemic Banking Crisis in Ireland. Report of the Commission of Investigation into the Banking Sector in Ireland. Government Publications. 156 pp. http://www.bankinginquiry.gov.ie/

6 Russell, C. (1993). Academic Freedom . Routledge, London &amp; New York. 119 pp.

## Current Sources of Threats to Academic Freedom

The nature and operation of universities in Ireland has changed significantly within the past decade, both in response to changes in society and in the way the universities see their place in society. These changes have brought with them a set of new challenges and circumstances that could run into conflict with academic freedom. In setting the context for the description and discussion of key principles of Academic Freedom in the following sections, a few of these are outlined here.

Perception of universities by outside bodies. There is a mistaken impression that the working time of a university academic  can be measured entirely by the hours spent lecturing in the classroom. There is often no appreciation that the primary purpose of a university, determined in the Universities Act (1997), is the advancement  of  knowledge  through  research  and  its  communication  in teaching. Academics are primarily researchers, working in the classroom, the laboratory and the library, and collaborating with other universities, research institutions and industry. Academics are required by their contracts to engage in research and this has to be carried out along with lecturing, mentoring, and examining  students,  as  well  as  supervising  graduate  students  and  directing research  staff.  They  run  research  groups  and  laboratories,  and  spend significant  time  in  preparing  grant  applications,  and  in  writing  and  peer reviewing scholarly publications. They provide input to public policy and their output in some areas of research can lead to the development of patents or spin-out companies. Acknowledgement of the academic's  administrative duties within  the  University,  or  service  to  society  and  to  the  subject/discipline necessary to build and maintain international reputation for the University and the country, is also typically neglected in public discussions on the nature of academic life. The effect of such limitations is a negative perception on the part of outside bodies and of society in general, which risks the withdrawal of, or decrease in support for, the needs and maintenance of academic freedom and its responsibilities and benefits.

Changes in university  governance. Mistakes  identified  in  the  governance  of financial and other institutions in Ireland have resulted in a greater awareness of  the  need  for  appropriate  governance.  They  have  highlighted  the  need  to review and change, where appropriate, the methods of corporate governance in business and public institutions 7 . They have often pointed towards  a method of governance comprising boards, governing authorities or councils involving smaller  numbers  of  members  predominantly  from  outside  the  organisation. Executive management  teams  are made  clearly accountable to such institutions. This enables more accountable as well as swifter and more direct decision-making.  Within  a  university,  governance  and  management  of  this character may, however, hinder individual and collegiate input into direction and decision  making,  and  may  limit  the  university's  autonomy  in  deciding  its teaching and research programmes. The academic freedom and

7   OECD. Corporate Governance and the Financial Crises:  Key Findings and  Main Messages.  2009.

58pp. http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/3/10/43056196.pdf

responsibility  to  provide  independent  and  rigorously  researched  information and opinion to society may also be inhibited.

Resources and resource allocation. State funding of specific areas of teaching and research can serve as an attraction for staff working in these and cognate areas, both in terms of recruitment of academic, research staff and graduate students,  as  well  as  in  infrastructure.  However,  allocation  of  resources  can serve to penalise those areas that find it more difficult to attract non- exchequer funding or those areas where student numbers are unlikely to rise significantly for justifiable reasons. There is a significant danger that, if unchecked, resource allocation  rather  than  free  and  well-founded  academic  enquiry  will  drive  the direction and intensity of university research and teaching.

Strategic planning and internal management systems. Such planning is vital for the  operation  of  a  modern  university.  However,  some  areas  of  teaching  and research are unlikely to feature in the strategic objectives of the university  and in the way in which such planning is implemented through internal management systems. This can result in exclusion from full participation in the  university's operation, with consequent negative impact upon the individual, the subject/discipline  and  the  school.  It  also  risks  stifling  academic  curiosity  to explore  the  unconventional.  Great  discoveries  and  inventions  are  rarely planned, either in universities or in businesses and cultural organisations.

Measurements  of  performance. Key  performance  indicators  (KPIs)  are  a feature of most schools, colleges and universities. There is continued debate as to  the optimum performance metrics between and within subject areas. The choice and application of KPIs may influence the nature of research or teaching carried out. Inappropriate methods and metrics may distort the assessment of a work's quality and inhibit true innovation. If they are not chosen correctly, with due appreciation of the need to support the diversity of teaching and research across the University, they may serve to limit the freedom to explore beyond the current research areas dictated by funding, or teaching areas and methods as determined by student numbers or perceived satisfaction levels.

Fixed-term contracts. Most informed discussions of  academic freedom acknowledge the necessity for tenure. However, fixed-term contracts are also commonly  and  appropriately used for project-related and post-doctoral appointments, which are an established part of the early career development system in many disciplines. Academic freedom applies to people appointed to all academic positions in the University. However, it is recognized that a trend towards  the  greater  use  of  fixed-term  contracts  by  universities  as  a  hedge against financial uncertainty consigns academics to  ongoing  insecurity beyond early career, limits the benefits associated with research and inhibits the ethos of scholarly and rigorous research that is essential to a university.

## Academic Freedom: Principles

In order to achieve the optimum efficiency and effectiveness in the operation of  a  university,  academics  must  have  confidence  in  the  governance  and management of the institution to articulate and implement its strategy and to account for its use of public funds. University management must likewise have the confidence to trust the wisdom and collegial integrity of academic staff in the operation of the university. The relevant State agencies, acting on behalf of society, must  also have  confidence that the universities fulfil their responsibilities of accountability for funding received. Only by the operation of such three-way trust and belief can the full benefits to all of academic freedom be  realised.  Therefore,  we  should  recognise  a  number  of  key  principles  of academic freedom. These are grounded within the legislation of the Universities Act  (1997)  and  the  policy  statement  of  the  International  Association  of Universities,  and  are  broadly  in  line  with  similar  principles  adopted  in  other universities abroad 8 and in Ireland 9 . They should underpin the application of university policy in a number the key areas that impinge on academic freedom.

Three key principles that should serve to inform the Academic Council, together with  other  governance  and  management  units  in  the  University, regarding issues of academic freedom are as follows:

1. Freedom of Expression. Policies of the University should recognise that freedom of expression is a core value of university life that has served it well throughout its history. No policy should be adopted that would deliberately or inadvertently diminish or inhibit freedom of expression among members of  the  university  -  either  staff  or  students.  Staff  and  students  should understand and be mindful of the obligations and responsibilities that are gifted through freedom of expression.
2. Teaching and Learning. The University, through its policies, should foster a  teaching  and  learning  environment  that  encourages  the  search  for  the truth,  facilitates  the  exchange  of  informed  opinion  between  teacher  and student,  and  values  diversity  of  opinion  and  critique  articulated  in  a constructive  manner.  Diversity  of  opinion  in  all  facets  of  teaching  and learning, including teaching and learning styles, subject matter  and learning outcomes,  should  be  a  natural  consequence  of academic  freedom. Academics should not be required to present as valid what they believe, on the basis of experience and informed opinion, to be untrue or inaccurate. Students  should  be  empowered  to  question  that  for  which  inadequate evidence is presented.  Notwithstanding  the facets  of  freedom  articulated above, the teaching staff  of the University should be expected to deliver a curriculum  arrived  at  through  collegial  discussion  at  discipline,  school, college or university level as appropriate.

8  1940 Statement of Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure with 1970 Interpretive Comments. American Association of University Professors. http://www.aaup.org/AAUP/pubsres/policydocs/contents/1940statement.htm

9 Trinity College Dublin Policy on Academic Freedom. 2010. 10 pp. http://www.tcd.ie/about/policies/academic-freedom.php

3. Research and Dissemination. The University should ensure the maintenance of an environment, both intellectual and physical, that fosters the  search for  truth  and  excellence  in  research.  Policies  should  facilitate individuals and groups in pursuit of their research goals and aspirations. Support for specific areas of research, such as those deemed key university strategic  areas,  should  not  be  pursued  in  a  manner  that  would  actively disadvantage other types or areas of research. History has shown that many of  the  greatest  research  advances  came  as  a  result  of  a  long  period  of dedicated research in areas that were not at the time deemed profitable, useful,  desirable  or  important.  However,  the  lack  of  funding  or  other opportunities  in  a  particular  area  does  not  negate  the  obligation  of  all academic and research staff in the University to conduct research to the highest  possible  standard  and  to  communicate  the  results  in  the  most appropriate manner.

## Academic Freedom and University Responsibility

It  is  well  understood  internationally  that  internal  university  management systems and processes can have a major bearing on academic freedom. These include, in particular, systems and processes commonly introduced in recent decades to allocate resources to priority areas, to  promote performance and to manage accountability.

The Universities' Act (1997), Section 14, entitles the University to regulate its affairs and obliges it to do so by using its resources in an efficient  and effective manner and subject to  public  accountability.  The  University  is  charged  with regulating  its  affairs  in  accordance  with  its  ethos of  independence  and  the traditional principles of academic freedom. This means that the management systems and processes established by the University must be cognisant of the merits of the breadth of disciplines and subjects, especially smaller ones which are vulnerable when key staff retire, and must regulate its affairs must operate in a manner that preserves and promotes academic freedom.

In addition to its legal obligations, UCD, like many other modern universities, has acquired multiple roles as agents of state- and industry-funded research and innovation, as a source of policy expertise and advice  and as educators  of students for a range of professional activities. Universities have responded to these new roles by instituting planning and resource allocation processes. They are also held accountable for their widening range of activities through external evaluation, often paralleled by internal assessment processes. Universities are increasingly  expected  to  demonstrate  the  value  which  they  contribute  to communities, economies and students who fund them, and to show all their major  stakeholder  groups  that  the  resources  entrusted  to  them  are  being efficiently  utilised.  They  have  also  acquired  specific  obligations  under  public policy  initiatives,  such  as  public  service  modernisation  programmes  and associated collective agreements, in areas like performance management and development  and  workload  allocation.  The  multiple  roles  of  the  modern university and the external and internal processes of

accountability,  planning,  resource  allocation and  management that they bring with them must also be undertaken in a manner that preserves and encourages academic freedom.

The University's management policies and processes, whatever their provenance, must therefore be implemented in a manner that preserves and encourages  the  freedom  of  academic  staff.  This  principle  has  significant implications in particular for the human resources policies and practices through which these various institutional obligations, roles and priorities interface with the teaching  and  research  of  academic  staff,  and  with  their  career  plans  and aspirations.

The preservation and encouragement of academic freedom requires  a balance to  be  struck  in  the  operation  of  these  management  processes  between  the obligations on the University and its constituent  colleges, schools, subject areas and  research  programmes  and  the  freedom  of  individual  academic  staff. University policies and management  processes must  be  implemented  so  as to  preserve  and promote academic freedom,  while also meeting the obligations of  the  University  to  be  accountable  and  supporting  its  priorities  in  teaching, research and resource allocation.

The  University  and  its  constituent  colleges,  schools  and  subject  areas  are obliged to ensure that duties are allocated in a fair and transparent manner. The administrative  burden  of  teaching  programmes  and  of  general  university governance must also be shared equitably and transparently.  These objectives are  best  achieved  on  a  collegiate  basis  within  schools  and  their  constituent subject areas.

Subject to these obligations and the attendant requirement that core teaching modules  and  programmes  are  properly  resourced,  the  process  of  allocating workloads should seek to accommodate and thereby benefit from the academic and research priorities of staff, where appropriate. It should be recognised that new  teaching  and  research  priorities  constitute  a  normal  part  of  university academic  activity  and  represent  a  source  of  innovation  and  a  driver  of  new knowledge  acquisition  by  students  and  the  community.  Scope  should  exist, subject  to  core  teaching  being  covered,  to  allow  academic  staff  to seek and undertake new teaching and research opportunities. The allocation of workloads should not operate in such a way that staff are confined indefinitely to teaching particular modules, or that may infringe their freedom to undertake inquiry in new and evolving fields or to disseminate the knowledge gained through research and teaching.

The operation of the University's Performance for Growth framework seeks to encourage  academic  staff  to  set  objectives  and development  priorities  with respect  to  personal  scholarship,  teaching  and  university  duties  in  the  wider context of University, College and School plans and priorities. Such a process is intended to support the development of academic staff over  the course of their evolving careers. It is important that the Performance for Growth process and allied processes be operated in such  a  way  that  the  research,  teaching  and other development priorities of individual staff be respected and supported, and specifically that they should not be operated in a manner that infringes academic freedom, or that seeks to  constrain academic staff to respond only to institutional

plans and priorities,  without  taking  due  regard  of  priorities  that  flow  from individuals'  disciplines  and the evolving research and knowledge base.

The University has developed a promotion system (up to Full Professor) based on an  assessment  of  the  following  criteria:  Research,  Scholarship  and Innovation; Teaching and Learning; Leadership and Contribution. The operation of the promotion system should pivot on the making of appointments on the basis of  personal  scholarly  and  teaching  attainments  and  merit,  as  underscored  by peer review, and on the basis of contribution  to  the  University,  academic  field and  the  community.  Staff  who  are following research programmes, or who are involved  in  delivering  modules and  programmes  that  may  not  be  seen  as reflecting  institutional  priorities,  should  not  be  put  at  any  disadvantage  in respect  of  promotion.  Nor  should  staff who are engaged in testing wisdom or questioning  received  opinion,  or  who  are  involved  in  controversies  arising therefrom, suffer any disadvantage  in respect of opportunities for promotion.

## Summary

1.  One of the major purposes of a university, outlined in the Universities Act (1997) is the advancement of knowledge. Academic freedom is essential for such advancement. It protects and nurtures the freedom of thinking and expression  in  teaching,  learning  and  research  that  is  at  the  very  core mission  of  a  university.  It  is  a  defining  characteristic  of  universities  both historically and globally.
2.  Academic  freedom  is  recognised  in  European  law  and  is  enshrined  in national university legislation and in university statutes. The principle and ethos  of  academic  freedom  have  been  endorsed  by  both  the  Academic Council and Governing Authority of UCD.
3.  Academic  freedom  carries  with  it  obligations  both  within  the  academic institution  and  also  to  society.  It  cannot  be  used  as  a  cloak  for  the underperformance of teaching, research or administrative duties.
4.  Society  is  a  major  benefactor  of  university  academic  freedom  through graduates, basic research, research output, technological advances, books, artistic  endeavours,  informed  independent  social  and  political  critique, analysis and policy advice.
5.  A number of threats to academic freedom exist, reflecting changes in the nature and operation of universities in the context of changing national and international environments. These threats require careful management to ensure that the ethos and societal benefits of academic freedom are not inhibited.
6.  The three key principles regarding the management of academic freedom centre  on  (a)  freedom  of  Expression,  (b)  freedom  within  Teaching  and Learning and (c) freedom within Research and Dissemination.
7.  A  framework  of  the  responsibilities  associated  with  fostering  academic freedom within the University is articulated.